---
layout: post
authors: [johan_silkens, michaela_broeckx]
title: 'DevOpsDays 2019'
image: /img/2019-11-28-devopsdays-2019/devopsdays-amsterdam-2019.png
tags: [DevOps, Conference]
category: Conference
comments: true
---

> The 7th edition of DevOpsDays Amsterdam was held in ‘Pakhuis de Zwijger’. 
> It was the first time that I attended DevOpsDays.
> I'd like to share my experiences and impression about the conference. 
> Because sharing ideas worth spreading is what we do at Ordina.

[devopsdays.org/](https://devopsdays.org/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}

# Table of contents
TODO
* [Half-Agile:  5 Leadership Mistakes Diluting Your Transformation, by Jesse Fewell](#half-agile--5-leadership-mistakes-diluting-your-transformation-by-jesse-fewell)
* [The Toyota Flow System, by Nigel Thurlow](#the-toyota-flow-system-by-nigel-thurlow)
* [The Agile Futurist, by Mario Moreira](#the-agile-futurist-by-mario-moreira)
* [Escape Velocity, by Doc Norton](#escape-velocity-by-doc-norton)

## Observability for Emerging Infra: What Got You Here Won't Get You There, by Charity Majors

Charity Majors is a co-founder and engineer at Honeycomb.io, a monitoring and analyzer tool that can gather information from various sources to give you an overview of what's going on in your (production) environment. 
She started with what she calls "The three pillars of observability": Metrics, logs and tracing. 
Most logging companies try to sell you these three products. 
Traditionally, metric tools are super hard for debugging, because it's hard to see the context to fully understand why something failed for instance.

On the other hand, logs are useful for (maybe?) compliance reasons but they're not so ideal either to analyze the context. 
We as human beings like visual things to easily see why things take a long time for example.

She continued later on that deploying code is not like "flipping a binary switch". 
It's more a step in a long process of being confident in your code, as you may know from your own professional experience in software development. 
Deployments from develop to production will not always go as planned. 
And it will always get more difficult to do so, because infrastructure has become more complex over the recent years. 
More than a decade ago, most infrastructure was just as simple as a simple LAMP stack. 
Nowadays, you have replica sets, nodes and your app built upon a microservice.

Without observability of your production systems, you cannot understand quickly what's going on.

Observability is not the same as monitoring, and to quote Gregory Poirier: 
"Monitoring systems have not changed significantly in twenty years and has fallen behind the way we build software. 
Our software is now large distributed systems made up of many non-uniform interacting components while the core functionality of monitoring systems has stagnated." 
That's because monitoring is what she called a 'post-talk' approach. 
It's coming on afterwards and dealing with the known unknowns.

Observability is a measure of how well internal states of a system can be interred from knowledge of its external outputs.

## How Convenience is Killing Open Standards, by Bernd Erk
Nowadays it's more convenient than ever to run all kinds of services in the cloud. 
But when it comes to interchange configuration between cloud providers, it can be a real pain. 
Because those providers are lacking an ‘open standard’ that can work over multiple providers. 
Bernd’s talk wants us to think about what Open Standards and Open Source could bring to us which have led to the success of Linux and Open Source communities we have today.

In his early career, Bernd was a Solaris system engineer who maintains more than just Solaris systems within his company. 
He maintains also other Unix like systems such as AIX and HP-UX. While other teams were on vacation. 
Managing unfamiliar platforms could be challenging and he hit the wall sometimes by doing it. 
But luckily most UNIX relies on the POSIX standard. 
POSIX made it even possible to develop other libraries such as GNU tools. 
So, they weren’t forced to use Sun’s (proprietary) freeware. 
Fast-forwarding to 2019, we see that open source is becoming more popular than ever before. 
But regarding Open Standards, there is some work to do.

The market has changed over the recent decade. 
Public and hybrid cloud are emerging and on premise is declining. 
We see that especially AWS and Azure are expanding in de recent years because more and more customers are using their services. 
All those cloud providers like AWS, Google Cloud, Azure,... have their own API’s and those are not interchangeable between each other. Because those API’s are lacking a standard. The fact that an API is open doesn’t imply that it is a standard. It’s only something you can access to. API is not a standard. That is why tools like Terraform are becoming popular. People have a need to have a unified standard to manage their resources. Bernd thinks that Open Source is very important to have open standards. Although those are not the same. There is also a problem if a certain cloud provider uses Open Software If they use a certain piece of open source software, there is no direct connection between the customer and the original developer of that software, because that layer was cut. No matter what business model the creator of the software has to earn money. Just because the end-user wants a certain package that is only available in the enterprise version.

Google does a good job regarding embracing Open Source. 
Because when they serve you.

Open Source tools in the cloud, they make sure that you have direct contact to the creators of the software to help you out. 
AWS on the other hand has their own versions of Open Source Software like Open Distro which is basically their own distribution of ElasticSearch. 
Cutting out the layer between the original developer, because you can only contact them for support. 
It brings fear and protection to the developers of the software because they are afraid that money and intellectual property goes away. 
That’s the reason why they come up with own licenses like Server-Side Public License (SSPL) that MongoDB uses. 
Which tells you if you change it to sell it as a SaaS offering, you have to contribute that code. 
Redis prohibits you that you sell their enterprise model as their cloud solution. 
Bernd doesn't like that people come up with new licenses, but he also understands that they are afraid that their money stream goes away, and they see this as a solution. 
We have to see that we support enough Open Source and Open Standards, because they need it to improve and maintain their software or service.

In today’s oligopoly of cloud providers, it’s really difficult to new players to emerge their new business. 
Although this will be good to have a more diverse internet. 
Most companies are focusing on the more human side of things when it comes to diversity. 
He compares it when there are only a few companies that control the availability of Insulin. 
Because there’s no market law and something to reduce prices. 
“Abuse of Power come as no surprise”.

At the end of his talk, he draws some conclusions:

* Be reasonable
    * Think about what you are doing
    * It must be easier for new players to enter the cloud marked – with the help of open standards -

* Interoperability is important
    * You can easily work with different services from different providers. So you can work together

* Support variety
    * Try to be out there and have a look on the industry on how it is. Think about what your next move will be.

* Demand contribution
    * Demand as a customer what you want to have form your provider

* Diversity is up to you
    * Demand more diversity on the technical level.

## Come Listen to me, I'm a fraud, by Joep Piscaer
Do you tend to chalk your accomplishments up luck or timing; do you hate making a mistake, being less than fully prepared or not doing things perfectly or do you even fear feedback? 
That was an exercise that Joep did to test if the audience have some form of imposture syndrome. 
He asked several questions where people have to raise their hand if that applies to him/her. 
And to keep them up at the next question. 
At the of his question round, more than half the audience had raised their hand.

Joep was testing the audience if they have the Imposter Syndrome. 
A collection of feelings of individual doubts that overwhelmed their successes and accomplishments so that they ‘think’ that they are a “fraud”. 
He described Imposter syndrome as an internal measuring stick that is broken or Pluralistic ignorance. 
Doubting yourself privately, believing you are alone in thinking that way because no-one voices their doubts. 
Nobody will ever hear it about each other although they are thinking the same way. 
It is very likely that one or more of your colleagues have Imposter Syndrome. 
Although they will not admit they suffer from it. 
Some are more open about that topic than others. 
No matter how successful they are in their personal life and career, they ‘suffer’ Imposter Syndrome in some way. 
Mike Cannon-Brookes, CEO of one of the larges DevOps companies in the world is very open about it during his Ted-Talk.

“Other people feel like this, too. And apparently it doesn't go away with more success.” - Mike Cannon-Brookes, Atlassian

Atlassian started like most big tech companies from a garage. 
Grew bigger and bigger and at some point, they needed an HR-person. 
While Mike was interviewing his potential HR-person, he felt a bit unsure, because he has never worked in a company with an HR-person before. 
So how will he now if this HR-person is good or not?

Like with many things, there is always a beginning where you have to figure out what way is the right way to do stuff. 
There is mostly not “one” best practice. 
Since everyone have their own best practice. 
And it is sometimes hard to know if your way is the right way, the good way or just sh*t. 
That mostly lead to discussions and insecurity with people, because they don’t now. 
By the time you have learned a new thing. 
It’s already obsolete or that does not longer apply anymore (like the goal you’ve reached was already moved to another position).

For example, a certain technology. 
He learned about Novell back in the day.

And by the time he became a guru, it was already obsolete, and it was no longer the thing you did. 
You do Microsoft or something else that replaces Novell. 
The tech landscape changes every couple of years and thus you have to learn things again sometimes. 
But that doesn’t really help when the Dunning-Kruger effect applies when learning new stuff. 
Most people don’t really discuss that certain things are new to them and that they are not really good at it yet. 
And they feel insecure sometimes. 
There are certain things you can do to reduce the feeling of the Imposter Syndrome (or to recalibrate your ‘internal ruler’ so to speak).

* **Nothing compares to you.** Every time you say something negative about yourself, say two things that are positive about yourself. 
It is as easy as that to retrain your internal NLP filter. 
At some point, your negative stuff will diminish, and your positive stuff will stay. 
Recommended to try this in front of a mirror.

* **"I will not compare myself to strangers on the internet."** 
You shouldn’t compare yourself to others, especially to others on the internet, because they are the worst.

* **Practice on giving compliments to others. And learn to receive them.** 
They can come from different perspectives. 
For a kid that just learned to tie shoelaces for example is an accomplishment because it is new to him/her. 
Although it means "nothing" to you because you've learned that a long time ago.

* **Learn how others make stuff and let others learn from you.** 
Other people no matter how professional they are, make mistakes as well and can learn things from you and you can learn from them.
    * Pair programming
    * Pair review
    * Celebrate your failure
    * Speak publicly

* **Find something your passionate about and keep tremendously interested in it.**
    * A hobby where you can screw things up without consequences

* .. etc

## Fight, Flight or Freeze – Releasing Organizational Trauma, by Matty Stratton
Imagine a Zebra grazing in the savanna of the African wilderness. 
Then suddenly a predator goes after the zebra. 
Of course, the zebra will run for his life (the flee state). 
When the zebra is caught by the predator, it ‘freezes’ because the zebra’s nervous system is overwhelmed, and it has no further solutions anymore. 
In the hope the predator will drop him and goes on. 
After the zebra has managed to get away it literally shakes all his stress on and goes back to rest like nothing happened. 
Humans can react the same way zebras do, although we are not a zebra. 
Humans on the other hand can experience traumas long after a dreadful situation has occurred in the way on our human brain works.

Animals are not traumatized by routine threads to their live, where humans on the other hand, are really overwhelmed and often subject to traumatic symptoms of hyper arousal, shutdown and dysregulation in Peter Levine’s words. 
During day two, Matty Stratton, DevOps advocate at PagerDuty, was talking about crisis management and traumatic events within organizations and teams. 
Based on his own experience with post-traumatic stress. 
And gave good examples on how to better handle ‘traumatic’ events that can happen. 
But let’s start on how traumas can occur. 
Although it’s rather complex to explain.

* Traumas occurs when one's solutions (active response to threat) does not work. 
The case where your nervous system can’t handle it.
Traumas can result from real or perceived threads. 
A perception of a ‘threat’ can also cause of recall traumatic situations.

* Trauma is subjective and relative. 
Everyone experiences and handles stress in a different way. 
People from the military for example experience stress and traumas in a different way than people in software projects. 
But that doesn’t mean that your experience isn’t real. 
Even though the experience from a soldier is much worse.

But how does that apply to an Organization? 
You can deal with common situations and everything will go back to normal. 
Business as usual (the gray line in the normal range), but in the event of severe outages or a similar event, where the team’s capacity for a solution does not work and can lead to non-discharged stress (the red line). 
To the organization.

Hyperarousal (fight or flight) is being stuck on.

Hyperarousal organizations are hyper-vigilant (like they are fighting Voldemort). 
They are hyper-aware of threats which causes a slowdown in moving forwarded. 
It’s not necessarily bad an organization to be vigilant. 
But rather when it loses a sane balance between vigilant and the will of moving forward and innovate.

Organizations can also be in a “freeze” or Stuck off state. 
Organizations that believe that they are ‘immune’ to threats to stay in a standstill. 
So, they won’t make any changes on how they operate. 
It also happens that organizations fluctuating between the stuck on and off state.

Humans like pattern recognition. 
We see signals that might remind us to events that happened before and activate us to respond the way we used to do last time. 
But the thing is that nothing is the same as it ever was back in the day. 
Because systems are becoming more complex as they grow.

Today’s challenge is to make organizations more resilient against dreadful events. 
Because resilient organizations are not traumatized by routine threats to their mission or business. 
Non-resilient organizations are readily overwhelmed and often subject to the symptoms of overreaction, shutdown and lack of regulated effort.

What you can do to be more resilient is to learn from your mistakes. 
Organize game days where you can practice an incident or outage. 
In a relax and safe way. 
It needs to be organized. 
They are not the same as stress tests.

## Conclusion

This is one of the conferences that has a different but interesting format. 
Different to what I'm used to on conferences where I’ve been to so far. 
You have on one hand talks during the morning and lightning talks and open spaces during the afternoon/evening where you can bring your own topics that you want to discuss with others. 
What I also like is the fact that there’s a good verity between the amount of technical and soft-skills talks.

That year the conference badges itself were actually seed mats that you can plant afterwards which I’ve done already. 
I’m curious what will grow out of it.

Overall, it was a good and informative conference that I can recommend to anyone who is interested in DevOps and teamwork optimizations within organizations.
