---
layout: post
authors: [kevin_van_den_abeele]
title: "JOIN 2020"
image: /img/2020-11-06-JOIN-2020/banner.jpg
tags: [JOIN, Ordina, JWorks, JWorks Open Innovation and Networking, talks, learning, conference, meeting, online, agile, tech, development, AWS, Amazon, Azure, Microsoft, Scrum, AI, ML, Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence]
category: IoT
comments: true
---
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/lightbox2/2.9.0/css/lightbox.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap-grid-only@1.0.0/bootstrap.css" />

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.2.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/lightbox2/2.9.0/js/lightbox.min.js"></script>
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap-grid-only@1.0.0/index.min.js"></script>

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Our speakers](#our-speakers)
3. [Tech Track](#tech-track)
4. [Agile & Business Track](#agile-and-business-track)
5. [In depth on talk - Ghelamco alert](#in-depth-on-talk-Ghelamco-alert)
6. [In depth on talk - Some pitfalls of AI](#in-depth-on-talk-some-pitfalls-of-ai)
7. [Resources](#resources)

## Introduction

As is annual tradition, even despite Corona, we held our 8th JOIN event in the beginning of October.
JOIN stands for JWorks Open Innovation & Networking and aims to bring interesting talks on a wide variety of topics.
This years edition was a bit different being that large gatherings of people are a no-no, so we opted for an online only edition.

<div style="position: relative; width: 100%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 55%;">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NeuqRdB60G0" width="100%" height="100%;" style="position: absolute; left: 0; top: 0; bottom: 0; right: 0;"></iframe>
</div>

We stuck to our dual track approach to provide some interesting sessions for everybody:

- A Tech track consisting of 4 sessions:
  - Ghelamco alert: Combining Raspberry Pi and AWS Cloud to get the best of both worlds - Bas Moorkens
  - Infrastructure is code with the AWS Cloud Development Kit (AWS CDK) - Kevin Azijn
  - Moving a complex and slow deployment pipeline to a streamlined and lightning fast Azure deployment - Pieter Vincken
  - Some pitfalls of AI - Joachim Ganseman


- An agile and business track also consisting of 4 sessions:
  - Dancing the BOSSA nova – how to bring a culture of experimentation into your company - Edwin Burgers & Maryse Meinen
  - The power of Kata - Michaëla Broeckx
  - Failure Culture – what it means to fail and how we can gain value from it - Anke Maerz
  - Why don't you get my code? - Francis Laleman

Read and watch on down below as we go over each speaker and talk.

## Our speakers

Like any event we depend on our contributors, in our case being our speakers.
Without them our event would not be possible, they provide us with the awesome and interesting sessions.

### Bas Moorkens

TODO

### Kevin Azijn

TODO

### Pieter Vincken

TODO

### Joachim Ganseman

TODO

### Edwin Burgers & Maryse Meinen

TODO

### Michaëla Broeckx

TODO

### Anke Maerz

TODO

### Francis Laleman

TODO

I would like to thank our speakers once more from the whole of Ordina for the interesting sessions they have given.

## Tech Track

### Session 1 - Ghelamco alert: Combining Raspberry Pi and AWS Cloud to get the best of both worlds - Bas Moorkens

<div style="position: relative; width: 100%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 55%;">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Iach3_dh83g" width="100%" height="100%;" style="position: absolute; left: 0; top: 0; bottom: 0; right: 0;"></iframe>
</div>

In this talk we will present our Ghelamco alerting solution which runs on a raspberry PI and is empowered by the AWS cloud to provide additional capabilities.
Come discover how we turned our RPI into a managed device by leveraging the AWS cloud.
We will demonstrate the power of this technology set by first covering the scenario where the solution is not connected to the internet.
In the second part we will do a deep dive on the scenario where the RPI is connected to the internet.
In this part we will show you how we can leverage more services of the AWS cloud to bring out the full potential of this solution, effectively giving us the best of both worlds.

### Session 2 - Infrastructure is code with the AWS Cloud Development Kit (AWS CDK) - Kevin Azijn

VIDEO UNDER REVIEW

The AWS Cloud Development Kit (AWS CDK) is an open source software development framework to model and provision your cloud application resources using familiar programming languages.
Provisioning cloud applications can be a challenging process that requires you to perform manual actions, write custom scripts, maintain templates, or learn domain-specific languages.
AWS CDK uses the familiarity and expressive power of programming languages for modeling your applications.
It provides you with high-level components that pre-configure cloud resources with proven defaults, so you can build cloud applications without needing to be an expert.
AWS CDK provisions your resources in a safe, repeatable manner through AWS CloudFormation.
It also enables you to compose and share your own custom components that incorporate your organization's requirements, helping you start new projects faster.

### Session 3 - Moving a complex and slow deployment pipeline to a streamlined and lightning fast Azure deployment - Pieter Vincken

<div style="position: relative; width: 100%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 55%;">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/uz4bs9EQA0E" width="100%" height="100%;" style="position: absolute; left: 0; top: 0; bottom: 0; right: 0;"></iframe>
</div>

Talks about how to automated application platform deployments.
Tips and tricks about a migration from an on-premise solution onto Microsoft Azure.
Want to know how we went from 6 week lead times on a development environment to only 90 minutes and a single push of a button?

### Session 4 - Some pitfalls of AI - Joachim Ganseman

<div style="position: relative; width: 100%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 55%;">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/I32IWBlcl5o" width="100%" height="100%;" style="position: absolute; left: 0; top: 0; bottom: 0; right: 0;"></iframe>
</div>

The hype surrounding AI and machine learning creates high expectations.
There is a strong focus on software that ultimately has to make autonomous decisions and relies on difficult to access and complex statistical conclusions from large amounts of data.
This comes with some risk: errors can creep in all steps from design to rollout, which can thoroughly mess up the end result.
In addition to the spectacular AI success stories of recent years, there were also quite a few spectacular mistakes.
In this webinar we highlight that downside: what can go wrong in an AI project and what should you pay attention to?
The agenda includes: bias and fairness, adversarial attacks, explainability, as well as concerns about security, privacy and ethics.

## Agile and Business Track

### Session 1 - Dancing the BOSSA nova – how to bring a culture of experimentation into your company - Edwin Burgers & Maryse Meinen

<div style="position: relative; width: 100%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 55%;">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xDxdfoqZxvg" width="100%" height="100%;" style="position: absolute; left: 0; top: 0; bottom: 0; right: 0;"></iframe>
</div>

In the VUCA world that we are in, companies are expected to be flexible and both rapidly responsive and resilient to change, which basically asks them to be agile.
The authors of the book BOSSAnova, Jutta Eckstein and John Buck saw 4 recurring problems at the agile transformations they were involved in, where they saw that all that comes with the agile frameworks, principles and practices is not sufficient for company-wide agility.
They combine Beyond Budgeting, Open Space, Sociocracy and Agile in practical guide for creating company-wide agility, in a probe-sense-respond manner.
This workshop gives a short introduction to BOSSAnova and how it can help to start probes and experiments in your own organization.
With an approach and a lot of good practice experiments done in other organizations.

### Session 2 - The power of Kata - Michaëla Broeckx

<div style="position: relative; width: 100%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 55%;">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/2IUNBhErVD0" width="100%" height="100%;" style="position: absolute; left: 0; top: 0; bottom: 0; right: 0;"></iframe>
</div>

We will jointly look for efficient ways to convert good intentions into value, by investigating some personal challenges and how we succeeded or failed.
We will examine these techniques and connect them to how our brain works.
For every challenge we take on, our human tendency to take the easiest path (the one we imagine to be right) can be counterbalanced by deliberate scientific thinking.

### Session 3 - Failure Culture – what it means to fail and how we can gain value from it - Anke Maerz

<div style="position: relative; width: 100%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 55%;">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PayZ4lKsr-w" width="100%" height="100%;" style="position: absolute; left: 0; top: 0; bottom: 0; right: 0;"></iframe>
</div>

I don't like failing.
I want to achieve a goal, I invest my time and energy, I am looking forward to achieving this goal, I am getting closer, closer - and fail.
The goal is not achieved and I want to retreat into a dark corner and just forget.
This is a perfectly normal human reaction.
Yet, as we all know, no big endeavor happens without its fair share of failure - some huge achievements even happen out of failure alone...
Hence, there is something useful to it.
Something that even smells like success!
This talk analyses different projects, their main impediments and success or failure factors, includes some interactive parts - and in the end (hopefully) leaves us with some renewed courage to face the failures in our lives... to gain value from them.

### Session 4 - Why don't you get my code? - Francis Laleman

VIDEO UNDER REVIEW

This is a playful, interactive session on the concept of "code" - as a formal, grammar-and-syntax-driven substitute for "meaning".
We all know that code is the central edifice of what it is that we are doing - at work, and, perhaps, even in life.
But do we fully understand the profound relationship between code and meaning? Do we really grasp how code, in all its formality and conventions, both pins us down into the confinement of "knowns", and has the power to liberate us from what is already known and drive us forward?
After this session, expect to be aware of more than just "code", and to be able to understand "meaning", in life and work, through a variety of grammars and syntaxes, more diverse than ever imagined.

## In depth on talk - Ghelamco alert

TODO

## In depth on talk - Some pitfalls of AI

TODO

## Resources

- [JOIN 2020 website](https://ordina-jworks.github.io/join/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}
- [Tech Track playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLgWyY-g33NlWg7rStHmTYPiN_0yJd4PxQ){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}
- [Agile & Business playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLgWyY-g33NlUR9F2PJ1h3bkd0cxSr4xab){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}
