---
layout: post
authors: [pieter_vincken]
title: 'Keeping up with dependencies like a boss'
image: /img/20221009-renovate/logo.png
tags: [cloud, automation, cicd]
category: Cloud
comments: true
---

- [What's the problem?](#whats-the-problem)
- [What is Mend Renovate?](#what-is-mend-renovate)
- [End user interaction](#end-user-interaction)
- [Behind the curtains](#behind-the-curtains)
- [How to setup](#how-to-setup)
- [Tip and tricks](#tip-and-tricks)
- [Why should I use it?](#why-should-i-use-it)
- [Links](#links)

## What's the problem?

### Lack of features

Let's imagine you need to implement support for a new feature.
Let's imagine that that feature is super easy to implement due to almost native support for the functionality in a library you're already using. 
That sounds like a great day, right? 
You add the code to glue together the API to the library, perform some tests and call it a day. 
There is just one problem, you didn't check which version of the dependency you were using and the feature you need is only supported in versions 8.x.x and beyond. 
You check your `pom.xml`, only to figure out that you're on version `6.8.21`.
Now you have two options, refactor 25% of your codebase to be able to use the new library or 5x your effort for implementing the feature without the support of the library.
That doesn't sound like a great day at the (home-)office, now does it?

Wouldn't be great to have been on version `8.1.2` already?

<!-- ### Dependent systems

Let's imagine another scenario.
You're a platform engineer in a large company. 
Among other things, you're responsible for operating the Apache Kafka clusters used by your company. 
You have 20 different teams using various Kafka clusters across different environments.
You get a request from one of the teams to update the Kafka cluster to a more recent version.
Since teams share the Kafka clusters for certain environments, you need to make sure all of them have supported versions of the clients.
Now, you have a couple of options: tell the requesting team no, tell all teams to upgrade to a supported version of the client libraries or upgrade all components yourself to a supported client library.  

//TODO
// Dependent systems updated -> libary support missing for newer version
// Dependent systems outdated -> unable to update libary due to outdated version

-->

### Security Vulnerability

Now we get to a scenario that maybe 50% of the Java community experienced at the end of 2021.
A severe security vulnerability was discovered in a very popular logging library: Log4J. 
Normally, vulnerabilities aren't this severe and there aren't part of the nine o'clock news.
Now imagine that you are using a vulnerable software component and you aren't informed by the news that you need to urgently update, how would you know about the vulnerability? 
Maybe you have some scanning software that checks for know CVEs?
Maybe you have really good developers that are subscribed to the mailing lists of all dependencies they're using?
Or more likely than not, you just don't know you're vulnerable. 
OWASP identified `Vulnerable and outdated components` as number six on their `Top 10 Web Application Security Risks` of 2021.

Wouldn't it have been nice to have a PR on every repository that had the Log4J dependency with the new version updated? So that you only had to merge that PR to mitigate the vulnerability?


## What is Mend Renovate?

Mend Renovate (formerly known as WhiteSource Renovate) is a tool that detects dependencies in your code and informs you if there are new versions of your dependencies available.
It's a free tool that can be used as a Github App or as a self-hosted tool. 
Renovate scans a repository and detects the used dependencies, relying on dependency managers. 
As of time of writing, Renovate supports about [80 different dependency management](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} systems out of the box.
Next, it can integrate with your code repositories (e.g. Bitbucket, Github, Gitlab, ...) and automatically update the dependency in your code and create pull requests for every update it detects.
It can even detect changelogs (if available) and add the changelog information to the PR. 
This is especially helpful if there are (manual) changes required to use the new version of the dependency.
So Renovate can `detect` your dependencies, `inform` you about the updates and even tell you `how` to update.

## Behind the curtains

Now, how does this magic work? 

Renovate starts by scanning your source code for dependencies.
It does this by looking for dependency files in your environment, let's take the example file structure below as an example.

```bash
repo/ 
├─ src/ 
├─ Dockerfile 
├─ pom.xml
```

Renovate will detect a Dockerfile and a Maven dependency file (`pom.xml`).
It will pass these files to the dependency managers internally and detect which dependencies are being used.
Let's imagine that the Dockerfile has the following from line at the top: `FROM amazoncorretto:18.0.0`
The dependency manager for docker will detect that this is the repository `amazoncorretto` with tag `18.0.0`. 
Next, it will look in the `pom.xml`. 

Excerpt of the pom.xml:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.logging.log4j</groupId>
    <artifactId>log4j-core</artifactId>
    <version>2.12.2</version>
</dependency>
```
**Note: Never use this dependency! This is a vulnerable version of log4j-core.**

Renovate will detect the following Maven dependency: `org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-core:2.12.2`

Next, Renovate will check for new versions of those dependencies. 
By default, Renovate will use the central Apache Maven Repository to check for newer versions of Maven dependencies. 
For Docker images, Docker Hub is used by default.
Like almost everything in Renovate, you can configure it to use different data sources, like your own Nexus, Artifactory or AWS Elastic Container Registry for example.
This way you can limit what sources are considered and you can also use Renovate to update internal dependencies instead of just public ones.

Now let's imagine that the most recent version of the `amazoncorretto` image is `18.0.2` (This is `latest` at the time of writing).
Renovate will create a branch from your main branch, update the `FROM` entry of your Dockerfile and push the changes into your repository as a new branch. 
Now your regular CI/CD process can be followed to build, test, merge and deploy your component with the updated dependency. 

The same scenario, with a second branch, will be performed for the update of the log4j dependency.

As an additional bonus, if the dependency supports exposes it, is that Renovate will add the changelogs in the pull/merge request it creates in your repository.
This makes it visible if any breaking changes were introduced and allows you to easily check, together with your tests, if you need to make changes to your code to update the dependency.

## How to setup

How to use Renovate depends a bit on where your code lives. 

### Renovate GitHub App

If you're using GitHub, the setup is as easy as enabling the [GitHub Renovate app](https://github.com/apps/renovate){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} for your repository. 
Next, Renovate will create an onboarding pull request where it will suggest a default Renovate configuration, show a preview of what dependencies it detected and an example of what updates it has found. 
The only thing left is to merge the pull request and renovate will automatically start scanning your repository and start creating branches and pull requests with dependency updates. 

### Self-hosted Renovate

The second option is to host Renovate yourself.
This option also comes with a lot more configuration capabilities, especially w.r.t. private data sources. 
You can run Renovate [as (part of) a pipeline](https://docs.renovatebot.com/examples/self-hosting/#gitlab-cicd-pipeline){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, as a [Docker container](https://docs.renovatebot.com/examples/self-hosting/#docker){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} somewhere or even as a [CronJob on Kubernetes](https://docs.renovatebot.com/examples/self-hosting/#kubernetes){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.
Since you only need NodeJS / NPM to be available, you can run it anywhere you want. 
You can find an example of how to run Renovate as a Cronjob on a Kubernetes cluster in [this repository](https://github.com/pietervincken/renovate-tekton-argo-talk/tree/main/k8s/renovate){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

With the self-hosted deployment method, you need to either explicitly tell Renovate which repositories it needs to consider or configure it to auto-detect repositories based on the users you've provided it. 
For Bitbucket Server you can for example configure Renovate to automatically discover all repositories in a specific project.
This prevents you from having to make changes to the Renovate configuration every time a new repository gets added. 

In this scenario, you'll have to provide Renovate an identity to interact with the code repositories as well, as it needs to be able to create branches and push code changes. 

## Tips and tricks

Aka things we discovered and/or went wrong while we started using Renovate.

### Limit concurrent branches / PRs

An important tip, especially if your repository contains quite some outdated components, is to limit the number of concurrent branches / pull requests that Renovate is allowed to create. 
By default, Renovate is not limited to a specific number which might result in literally 10s if not over 100 pull requests being created. 
To prevent you or your developers from becoming overwhelmed by this, [limiting the concurrent pull requests](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#prconcurrentlimit){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} is a must!

### Setup auto-merging

Auto-merging is a very powerful feature in Renovate, especially in combination with very good automated tests and continuous integration practices. 
**Don't** enable this when starting out with Renovate. 
Over time, you'll be able to identify repositories and data sources for which updates are becoming as easy as just accepting the PRs. 
For these combinations of repositories and data sources, you can enable auto-merging in Renovate. 
This means that Renovate will perform the update to the code repository and if the result of the pipeline for that change is green, it will attempt to merge that PR.
If you have a well-automated CI/CD process, this can allow Renovate to automatically update your dependencies and make sure that your software automatically has the latest dependencies. 

### Start slow!

The last tip might sound a bit contradictory, but starting small with Renovate is key. 
You want to build confidence in the data sources you're using and prevent your teams from being overwhelmed by Renovate PRs. 
A good way to start with Renovate is to enable it on just one or maybe a handful of low impact repositories. 
This way, you can see what effect it has on your workflow and how teams react to having these PRs pop up in their change feed. 

### Use it in deployment repositories

//TODO

## Why should I use it?

At the start of this blog post, we've discussed why updating dependencies is important.
As discussed, bulk updating dependencies is an option, but it might be time-consuming and therefor might be bumped to the bottom of the priority list.
Not to mention that you might miss important security updates if you need to "look" for the changes manually. 
By automating the update process and allowing a tool to automatically discover the updates, it makes the update process a lot simpler and faster. 
If you already have a good CI/CD process that allows you to build, test, merge and deploy small changes easily, Renovate will save you tons of time and prevent you from running unsafe, outdates software.

And as one of my favorite sayings goes: **anything worth doing twice is worth automating**

### Links

- [Mend Renovate website](https://www.mend.io/free-developer-tools/renovate/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}
- [Renovate Github Repository](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}
- [Renovate docs](https://docs.renovatebot.com/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}
- [JOIN 2022 Talk YouTube Link](TODO){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}

Feel free to reach out to [me](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pieter-vincken-a94b5153/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} if you want to look into this solution. 

Special thanks to the Unicorn team for helping with the blog post and automating the dependency updates!